.TH CHECKSMIX 1 "May 2025" "checksmix 0.2.23"
.SH NAME
checksmix \- run MMIX assembly or object files with a lightweight emulator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B checksmix
.RI [ options ]
.RI FILE...
.br
.B checksmix run
.RI [ options ]
.RI FILE...
.br
.B checksmix check
.RI FILE.mms...
.br
.B checksmix build
.RI [ \-o
.IR OUT.mmo ]
.RI FILE.mms...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B checksmix
is a fast MMIX emulator. It can parse and execute MMIX assembly
.RB ( .mms )
directly, or load MMIX object files
.RB ( .mmo ).
Legacy MIX programs
.RB ( .mix
or
.BR .mixal )
are also supported.
.PP
When invoked with a file (or without a subcommand), the default behavior is
.BR run .
Multiple
.BR .mms
files are assembled into one shared symbol space before execution.
.PP
.B Subcommands:
.TP
.B run FILE...
Execute one or more program files. With a single
.BR .mms " or " .mmo
file, dispatches by extension. With multiple files (must all be
.BR .mms ),
assembles them into one shared symbol space, then executes.
.TP
.B check FILE.mms...
Parse and encode one or more
.B .mms
source files; exits silently on success, with error messages on failure.
.TP
.B build [--output OUT.mmo] FILE.mms...
Assemble one or more
.B .mms
source files into a single
.B .mmo
object file. Multiple inputs are assembled into one shared symbol space.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Enable tracing output from the emulator. Example:
.BR RUST_LOG=checksmix=debug .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I examples/hello_world.mms
Minimal program using
.B TRAP 0,Fputs,StdOut
to print a string.
.TP
.I examples/linked_list.mms
Traverses a static linked list and sums node values.
.TP
.I examples/all_instructions_test.mms
Broad instruction coverage for regression testing.
.SH EXAMPLES
Run MMIX assembly directly:
.PP
.RS
.nf
checksmix examples/hello_world.mms
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run a prebuilt object file:
.PP
.RS
.nf
checksmix target/hello_world.mmo
.fi
.RE
.PP
Check syntax of assembly source files without executing:
.PP
.RS
.nf
checksmix check examples/hello_world.mms
.fi
.RE
.PP
Build an object file from assembly source:
.PP
.RS
.nf
checksmix build -o target/output.mmo examples/hello_world.mms
.fi
.RE
.PP
Assemble multiple source files into one shared symbol space, then run:
.PP
.RS
.nf
checksmix examples/module1.mms examples/module2.mms
.fi
.RE
.PP
Or assemble them first, then run the object file:
.PP
.RS
.nf
checksmix build examples/module1.mms examples/module2.mms -o /tmp/combined.mmo
checksmix /tmp/combined.mmo
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mmixasm (1)
